<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html
  SYSTEM "about:legacy-compat">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
   <head>
      <title>Historical Tales of Illustrious British Children: Wolsey Bridge</title>
   </head>
   <body>
            <div class="navbar"><!--#include virtual="menu.xhtml" --></div>
            <div class="text">
            <h1>Wolsey Bridge</h1>
            <p>
                On the south side of the ancient
                    passage leading from the street to the
                    churchyard of St. Nicholas, was
                    formerly
                    situated the commodious house of Thomas
                        Wolsey, a substantial
                    butcher and grazier, of the town of Ipswich, in the sixteenth century.
            </p>
            <p>
                This Thomas Wolsey
                    was one of those persons with whom the
                    acquisition of wealth appears to be the sole purpose of existence.
                It was his boast "that he had thrice trebled the
                    patrimony he had
                    derived from his father," from whom he had
                    inherited his flourishing business, besides some personal property.
                Acting in direct contradiction to that
                    injunction of the royal psalmist, "If riches increase, set not your heart upon
                    them," his very soul appeared to dwell in his money bags, his well attended shambles, or the pleasant lowland pastures where the
                        numerous flocks and herds grazed, the profits on which he calculated
                    would so materially
                    improve his store.
                He made no show, no figure among his fellow
                    townsmen; never exchanging his long
                    blue linen gown, leathern girdle, and coarse
                    brown hose, for any other apparel,
                    except on a Sunday, when he wore a plain
                    substantial suit of sad coloured cloth, garnished with silver buttons, and the polished steel and huge
                    sheath knife, which he usually
                    wore at his side, were
                    exchanged for a silver hiked dagger and an antique rosary and crucifix.
                Satisfied with the conviction that he was one of the wealthiest tradesmen in Ipswich, he saw no reason for exciting the envy of the poor or the ill will of the rich, by any outward demonstrations of the fact, but continued to live in the same snug
                    plain manner to which he had
                    been
                    accustomed in his early days, making it the chief desire of his heart that his only son, Thomas, should
                    tread in his steps, and succeed him in his prosperous and well established business, with the same economical habits and an equally
                    laudable care for the main
                    chance.
            </p>
            <p>
                The maternal pride of his wife, Joan, who was
                    the decendant of a family that could
                    boast of gentle blood, prompted the secret hope
                    that the ready wit and studious
                    habits, together with the clerkly skill
                    and learned lore which the boy had already acquired at the grammar school, might qualify him for something better than the greasy craft of a butcher, and perhaps one day elevate him to the situation of port reeve
                    or town clerk.
                But for the boy himself, his youthful
                    ambition pointed at higher marks than the golden speculations of trade, or the
                    attainment of lucrative offices and
                    civic honours in his native town. From the first moment he entered the grammar school, and took his place on the lowest seat there, he determined to occupy the highest, and to this, in an almost incredible brief period
                    of time, he had
                    rapidly
                    ascended; and, though only just entering his twelfth year, he was now the head boy in the school, and in the opinion
                    of his unlearned father, "knew more
                    than was good for him."
            </p>
            <p>
                As soon, indeed, as his son Thomas had
                    learned to write a "fair
                    clerkly hand, to cast accounts, and construe a page in the Breviary," he considered his education complete, and was
                    desirous of saving the expense of keeping him longer at school; but here he was
                    overruled by his more liberal minded wife, Joan, who, out of the savings of her own privy purse, paid the quarterly sum of eight-pence to the master of
                    the school, for the further instruction of her hopeful boy, Thomas, whose
                    abilities she regarded as little less than miraculous.
                Persons better qualified than the good
                    wife, Joan Wolsey, to judge of the natural talents and precocious acquirements of her son, had also spoken in high terms of his
                    progress in the learned languages, and predicted
                    great things of him.
                These were personages of no less importance
                    than the head master of the Ipswich grammar school, and the parish priest of St.
                    Nicholas, the latter of whom was a frequent
                    visitor at the hospitable messuage of
                    master Thomas Wolsey the elder, on the ostensible business of chopping Latin with young
                    Thomas, and correcting his Greek exercises for him ; but no doubt the spiced tankards of flowing ale, and the smoking beefsteaks, cut from the very
                        choicest part of the ox, and temptingly
                    cooked by the well-skilled hands of that accomplished housewife, Joan
                        Wolsey, to reward him for his good report of her darling boy's proficiency, had some influence in drawing
                    Father Boniface thither so often.
            </p>
            <p>
                The bishop of the diocess himself had
                    condescended to bestow
                    unqualified praise on the graceful and eloquent manner in which, when he visited the school, young
                    Wolsey
                    had
                    delivered the complimentary Latin oration on that occasion.
                The good natured prelate had even condescended to pat his curly head on the conclusion of the
                    address, and to say, Spoken like a cardinal, my little man!
            </p>
            <p>
                From that moment young
                    Wolsey
                    had
                    made up his mind as to his future destiny.
                It was to no purpose that his father tried the alternate eloquence of entreating, reasoning, promises, and threats, to detach him from his engrossing studies, and induce him to turn his attention to the lucrative
                    business of a butcher and grazier.
                The idea of such servilely earned pelf was
                    revolting to the excited
                    imaginanation of the youthful
                    student, whose mind was full of classic
                    imagery, and intent on the attainment of academic honours, the steps by which he
                        projected to ascend to the more elevated
                    objects of his ambition.
            </p>
            <p>
                The church was, in those days, the only
                    avenue through which talented persons of obscure birth might hope to arrive at greatness, and young
                    Wolsey
                    replied to all his father's exordiums urging him to attend to the cattle market, the slaughter house, or the shambles, by
                        announcing his intention of becoming an
                    ecclesiastic.
            </p>
            <p>
                The flush of anger with which this unwelcome declaration had
                    clouded the brow of the elder
                    Wolsey
                    was
                    perfectly perceptible when he returned home after the fatigues of the day
                    to take his evening meal, which his wife,
                        Joan, was
                    busily
                    engaged
                    preparing for him over the fire with her own
                    hands.
                I knew how it would
                        turn out all along of your folly,
                        mistress, in keeping the boy loitering away his time and learning all manner of evil habits at
                        the grammar school, when he ought to
                        have been
                        bound apprentice to me, and learning our honest craft for the last two
                        years,
                    muttered the malcontent butcher, throwing himself into his large arm chair, lined with sheepskins.
            </p>
            <p>
                What a coil the woman keeps up with her frying-pan,
                    continued he, peevishly, on perceiving that the discreet
                    Joan
                    appeared disposed to drown the ebullitions of his wrath in the hissing and
                    bubbling of the fat in her pan, as she artfully
                    redoubled her assiduity in shaking it over the blazing hearth.
            </p>
            <p>
                
                    Why Joan, pursued he, one cannot hear oneself speak for the noise you make.
                
            </p>
            <p>
                The noise is all of your
                        own making, I trow, master,
                    replied
                    Joan, continuing
                    to stir her hissing sputtering pan briskly
                    as she spoke.
            </p>
            <p>
                I say, leave off that frizzling with the fat in that odious pan,
                    vociferated he.
            </p>
            <p>
                So I will, master, if you
                            wish to have burnt collops for your supper to night,
                    replied Joan, meekly.
            </p>
            <p>
                
                    "I don't
                        care whether I have any supper at all," replied the butcher, testily; "I am
                        vexed, mistress."
                
            </p>
            <p>
                Good lack! what should
                        happen to vex you, master?
                    responded his wife.
                I am sure the world always
                        seems to wag the way you'd have it go; but losses and crosses in business
                            will
                        chance, even to the most prosperous, at times. Is one of
                        your fat beasts dead?
            </p>
            <p>
                
                    No!
                
            </p>
            <p>
                
                    Some of your sheep been
                        stolen?
                
            </p>
            <p>
                
                    No!
                
            </p>
            <p>
                
                    "Mayhap then, some customer, whom you have
                        suffered to run up a long score, is either dead or bankrupt?"
                
            </p>
            <p>
                
                    Worse than that, mistress.
                
            </p>
            <p>
                "I prythee, good
                        Thomas, let me hear the truth at
                        once,"
                    exclaimed the startled
                    Joan, upsetting the frying-pan into the fire in her alarm.
                The misfortune must be
                        great that hath
                        befallen you, if it be
                        reckoned by you worse than the loss of
                        money.
            </p>
            <p>
                
                    Why, mistress, do not
                        you reckon the perverse inclinations of
                        one's own flesh and blood a more serious calamity than the loss of
                        substance?
                
            </p>
            <p>
                Ay, master; but that is a
                        trial we have never had the sorrow of knowing; since our only son, Thomas,
                        albeit I say it who ought not, is the most dutiful, diligent, and loving
                        lad, that ever blessed a parent's
                        heart,
                    said the fond mother, melting into tears of tenderness as she spoke.
            </p>
            <p>
                "Hold thy peace,
                        dame,"
                    cried the indignant husband, darting a look of angry reproach on the offending youth, who had
                    been
                    comfortably
                    reposing himself on an oaken settee by the
                    fire side, reading Virgil's Eneid by the
                    light of the blazing embers, during the whole of the discussion, without concerning himself about any thing, save to
                        preserve the beloved volume from being
                    sprayed by the fat which the frying pan, in falling, had
                    scattered in all directions.
                That lad, on whom you bestow such foolish commendations," pursued
                        old
                        Wolsey; "that lad, whatever might have
                        been his former virtuous inclinations, hath now disappointed all my hopes, for he hath
                        turned an errant scape-grace, and refuseth to become a butcher, though the shambles he would
                        inherit from me are the largest, the
                        most commodious, and best frequented with ready-penny customers, of any on
                        the market hill.
                Moreover, it is a
                        business in which his grandfather got
                        money, and I, following in his good
                        steps, with still better success, have
                        become I scorn to boast, but the truth
                        may be
                        spoken without blame one of the wealthiest tradesmen in the
                        borough.
            </p>
            <p>
                Then the less need, my master, of enforcing such a clever lad as our Thomas to follow a craft
                        which is so unsuitable for a scholar,
                    observed
                    Joan.
            </p>
            <p>
                There, groaned the
                        butcher, was the folly of making him one, which hath
                        been the means of teaching him to slight the main chance, and to turn his head with pagan poesies or monkish lore.
                Would you believe it,
                        mistress Joan,&#x97;he hath
                        had the audacity to profess his desire of becoming a student at the university of
                        Oxenford?
            </p>
            <p>
                And why should he not,
                        master Wolsey, since he promiseth to become a learned
                        clerk?
                    asked the proud mother.
            </p>
            <p>
                To what purpose should he
                            go thither?
                    said the father.
            </p>
            <p>
                Marry, master, to increase his learning, and to put him in the way of becoming
                        a great man,
                    responded mistress Joan.
            </p>
            <p>
                A great man, forsooth! echoed her husband, contemptuously; who ever heard of a butcher's son becoming a person of distinction?
            </p>
            <p>
                I have
                        heard, Sir, said
                        young
                        Wolsey, closing his book eagerly, I
                            have
                        heard of a destitute swineherd becoming a pope.
            </p>
            <p>
                Indeed!
                    ejaculated his father, with an air of
                    incredulity.
            </p>
            <p>
                
                    Yes, Sir, it was
                        Nicholas Brekespeare, afterwards
                            Pope Adrian the fourth, the only
                        Englishman who ever filled the papal
                        chair, but perhaps not the last whom learning, combined with persevering
                        enterprize, may conduct to that
                        eminence.
                
            </p>
            <p>
                Ho! ho! ho!" cried the
                        butcher, bursting into a loud laugh; I
                            wist not of the high mark at which
                        your ambition aimeth, son Thomas!
                Well, if enabling you
                        to become a servitor in Magdalen College
                            will
                        advance your holiness one step towards
                        the possession of St. Peter's keys, I will
                        not withhold my assistance and my
                        blessing, though much I doubt whether it
                            will
                        carry thee into the Vatican, or whatever
                        you call it, of which you and father
                            Boniface are always
                        talking.
            </p>
            <p>
                
                    And what if it do not carry him quite so far, master, interposed
                        Joan, didst
                        thou never hear of the proverb, He who
                            reacheth after a gown of cloth of
                        gold shall
                        scarcely
                        fail of getting one of the sleeves?
                
            </p>
            <p>
                
                    Ay, mother, cried
                        young
                        Wolsey; and when I am a cardinal, my father will
                        thank you for the parable.
                
            </p>
            <p>
                Ah! if I ever live to see that day, son Thomas!
                    observed the butcher.
            </p>
            <p>
                Why should you doubt it, master?
                    asked mistress Joan.
            </p>
            <p>
                
                    Because, wife, it is
                        easy to talk of dignities and honours, but to obtain them would
                        be
                        attended with difficulties, which I doubt our simple son, Thomas, will
                        find insurmountable.
                
            </p>
            <p>
                I shall, at least, lose nothing in making the attempt,
                    observed
                    young
                    Wolsey.
            </p>
            <p>
                There is your mistake,
                        boy; you will
                        lose something very considerable,
                    replied his father.
            </p>
            <p>
                
                    Dear father, what can that be for which the learning I shall
                        acquire
                        will not make ample amends?
                
            </p>
            <p>
                The most flourishing butchery in Ipswich, simpleton! which,
                        if once lost through your inconsiderate folly, you may
                        study till doomsday, and acquire all the learning in popedom and heathenesse
                        into the bargain, without being able to
                            re-establish it in its present
                        prosperity,
                    returned the mortified father, with a groan.
            </p>
            <p>
                A smile, which the younger
                    Wolsey
                    strove in vain to repress, played over
                    his features at these words.
            </p>
            <p>
                Ay, scorn and slight the substantial good that is within your reach for the sake of the vain
                        shadow which is beyond your power to obtain, Thomas
                            Wolsey,
                    said his father, with great bitterness.
            </p>
            <p>
                
                    My dear father, you know
                        little of the powers of the human mind, or of the mighty things which its
                        energies, when once roused, and directed towards one object, may effect.
                
            </p>
            <p>
                
                    I tell you, Thomas, that the end which you propose
                        is impossible.
                
            </p>
            <p>
                
                    Sir, replied
                        young
                        Wolsey, I have
                        blotted that word out of my
                        dictionary.
                
            </p>
            <p>
                
                    I like your spirit, young man, said his father, albeit, it savoureth a little of presumption.
                
            </p>
            <p>
                
                    That remains to be
                        proved, said his son, and I am quite
                        ready that my earnestness should
                        be
                        tried by any test you may be
                        inclined to demand.
                
            </p>
            <p>
                
                    I shall
                        hold you to your word, replied his father, and condition, that if you take up your bachelor's degree within
                        four years of your entering Magdalen
                        College, then shall you proceed in the course of life on which you are so determinately
                        bent; but if you fail in doing
                        this, then shall you return to my house, and submit your future destiny to my disposal.
                
            </p>
            <p>
                If I take it not up within
                        two years of my entering the college, barring accidents of sickness or death,
                        then strip me of the learned stole of a
                        clerk of Oxenford, and chain me to your
                        girdle as a butcher's slave for life,
                    replied the youth with a heightened
                    colour.
            </p>
            <p>
                
                    Thou hast
                        pledged thyself to that which thou canst not perform, son Thomas, replied his father. Who ever heard of a boy of fourteen taking up a bachelor's degree of Oxenford?
                
            </p>
            <p>
                Thou shalt
                        hear of one, anon, mine honoured father, said young Wolsey.
            </p>
            <p>
                I will
                        engage that thy mother shall
                        have the finest baron of beef in my
                        shambles to roast for dinner on the day
                        on which I hear that news,
                    rejoined his father.
            </p>
            <p>
                
                    See that you keep my father to his promise, mother, said the youth, for I shall
                        travel night and day, in hopes of being the first to communicate the intelligence, or at any rate, to arrive in time to comein for a slice of the beef while it be hot.
                
            </p>
            <p>
                The important object being now accomplished of obtaining the consent of the elder
                    Wolsey to his son's entering the university of Oxford, the lad commenced his journey on the following day
                    for that ancient seat of learning.
                He was on foot, for the sturdy butcher, his father, though well able to send him thither on a stout pack-horse, attended by one of his own men, was
                    determined to afford no facilities for an enterprize to which he had so little relish.
            </p>
            <p>
                The loving care of mistress Joan Wolsey
                    had
                    supplied the youthful candidate for scarlet stockings and
                    cardinal's hat with a few silver groats for his expenses on the road, and a
                    needful stock of linen and other necessaries, which he carried in a leathern wallet over his shoulder at the
                    end of a stout oaken staff; but that which young
                    Wolsey
                    considered more precious than either money or
                    apparel, was a letter of recommendation from
                    the head master of the Ipswich grammar school to the master of Magdalen
                    College.
            </p>
            <p>
                This credential obtained for its lonely and friendless bearer that attention which his juvenile appearance, diminutive stature, and his coarse and travel-soiled attire, would most probably have
                    failed of attracting.
                Having
                    passed his examination with great credit to
                    himself, he was
                    admitted as a servitor of Magdalen
                    College.
                In this novel situation young
                    Wolsey
                    had some difficulties, and not a few hardships
                    and privations to contend with; but these,
                    when weighed against the mighty object which
                        engrossed all his thoughts, were as dust in the balance, and the only
                    effect they had
                    was to increase his persevering diligence.
                At the end of the first term he had
                    made a progress which astonished his masters and fellow students.
                Before the two years had
                    expired within which the lad had
                    pledged himself to take up a degree, an attempt which his father, with
                    reason, judged unattainable by reason of his
                    tender age, the good-wife Joan Wolsey, in great haste, entered the shambles, where her husband was
                    preparing to put an uncommonly fine baron of beef into the basket of a nobleman's
                    servant, and laying hands upon it, exclaimed, Why, Thomas Wolsey, what are you about to do with that meat?
            </p>
            <p>
                To send it to the house
                        of my lord, according to order, to be
                        sure, mistress,
                    replied the butcher, with a look of
                    surprise.
            </p>
            <p>
                And it had
                        been
                        ordered by King
                            Henry himself, he should not have it to-day,
                    said mistress Joan.
            </p>
            <p>
                Is your wife delirit,
                        master Wolsey?
                    asked the servant.
            </p>
            <p>
                One would
                        suppose so by her wild words,
                    said the astonished butcher, who knew not what to think of the behaviour of his usually discreet spouse.
            </p>
            <p>
                
                    If I be, master, it is with joy, replied
                        Joan Wolsey; but the truth is, I came hither to claim the finest baron of beef in the shambles,
                        which you said I should
                        roast for dinner on the day on which you
                            heard the news of our son, Thomas Wolsey, taking up a bachelor's degree at Oxenford.
                
            </p>
            <p>
                And who brought you the
                        intelligence, mistress?
                    demanded her husband.
            </p>
            <p>
                
                    A joyful
                        messenger, my good man, for it was the boy himself, (blessings on him
                        !) dressed in his bachelor's gown, and bearing the certificate of his admission as a fellow of Magdalen
                        College.
                
            </p>
            <p>
                
                    Humphrey! cried the delighted father, turning to
                        his head man, take that baron of beef home
                        to my house, and help thy mistress to spit it, and put it down to the fire, that my boy bachelor may
                            dine off the best joint in my
                        shambles; and do you, master Ralph, added he, turning to his lordship's servant, make my duty to my lord, and ask him if he will
                        be pleased to put up with rump or ribs to-day, since the baron of
                        beef, for which his housekeeper hath
                        sent, was
                        bespoken nearly two years before his
                        order came, and my good dame hath
                        come to claim my pledge in earnest.
                
            </p>
            <p>
                
                    Which my lord is too strict an observer of his own
                        word to wish you to forfeit on his account, I am sure, master
                            Wolsey, said
                        Ralph; and when I explain the pleasant cause for which you have
                        made
                        bold to disappoint his lordship of his favourite dish
                        to-day, he, who is himself a scholar and
                        a patron of learning withal, will
                        hold you excused.
                
            </p>
            <p>
                This day being a holiday, the head master of
                    the Ipswich grammar school, several of young
                    Wolsey's chosen friends among the scholars, and the good-humoured curate of St.
                    Nicholas, were
                    invited to partake of the baron of beef which the young bachelor had
                    so honourably
                    earned, and which mistress Joan Wolsey
                    cooked in her most approved style, to the
                    great satisfaction of her husband and the guests.
            </p>
            <p>
                This was one of the long vacations, but no
                    season of idleness to young
                    Wolsey, whose unremitting application to study
                    impaired his appetite, and rendered him languid and feverish, which
                    his anxious mother perceived, and feeling some alarm lest his incessant mental toil might injure
                    his naturally
                    feeble constitution, she communicated her uneasiness to her husband,
                    and asked him if he could not contrive
                    some little pleasant employment for him, which would
                    have the effect of diverting him for a few days from his sedentary
                    occupations.
            </p>
            <p>
                
                    Ay, ay, dame, replied
                        old
                        Wolsey, I have a choice bit of pastime for the boy; he shall
                        go with Humphrey and Peter and Miles to buy
                        beeves off the Southwold and Reydon commons and marshes.
                
            </p>
            <p>
                That would
                        do well enough, master, if the lad were any judge of cattle, which I fear, with all his college learning, he
                            is not,
                    responded mistress Joan.
            </p>
            <p>
                You may well say that,
                        mistress, rejoined the butcher, for
                        though he hath
                        been
                        born, bred, and nourished in the
                        midst of such matters, and he is observant enough in other things, yet I would
                        answer for it, he knoweth not the difference between a fat beast and
                        a lean one, a Scot or a home-bred, yea, scarcely between a long horn or a
                        short; and were I to send him on this business of mine without my shrewd foreman, Humphrey, to instruct his ignorance and detect the knavery of the sellers, he would
                        bring me home pretty bargains of beasts
                        against the Easter festivals.
                Why these fat
                        monks of Reydon, who are far better
                        skilled in grazing for the Ipswich and Yarmouth markets than
                        in their church Latin, would
                        be sure to palm their old worn-out mortuary cows upon him for
                        fine young heifers, and make him pay the price of three-year-old steers for their
                        broken-down yoke oxen that had
                        ploughed the convent lands for the last
                        ten years.
                But, as I said before,
                            Humphrey
                        shall
                        go with him, who is used to their tricks of old, and will
                        bid them half their asking price at a
                        word, which our Thomas would be ashamed of doing to men of their cloth were
                        he left to himelf, so he shall
                        only
                        have the pleasant part of the business, to
                        wit, listening to the chaffering, and paying down the money when the price is
                        agreed upon by those who are wiser in such matters than himself.
            </p>
            <p>And how do you propose for him to perform the journey, master, for the places whereof
                        you speak are many miles distant?
                    said Joan.</p>
            <p>
                Under forty miles, wife, which will
                        be no great stretch for Miles and Peter (who are to drive the cattle) to walk; as
                        for Thomas, he shall
                        ride my grey mare, and Humphrey can take the black nag, and give
                        Miles and Peter a lift
                        behind him by turns, which will
                        ease their legs, and make it a pleasant journey for them all. Ah! that
                        part of Suffolk is a fine grazing
                        country to travel through. I am sure I shall
                        envy
                        Thomas the prospect of so many herds and flocks as
                        he will
                        see on those upland meads and salt
                        marshes; but he will
                        think more of chopping Latin with the monks of Blitheborough, and
                            looking over their old musty books
                        and records, which could never give a hungry man his dinner, than of
                        all the sensible sights he might see by
                        the way.
            </p>
            <p>Every one to his vocation, master, replied
                        Joan Wolsey; yours it is to feed the
                    bodies, and my Thomas's will
                    be to nourish the minds of men with a more enduring food than that which you
                        have it in your power to provide.</p>
            <p>
                Gramercy, mistress! said the butcher, with a grin; one would
                        think he had
                        been
                        feasting you on some of his improving
                        diet, for you begin to discourse like a doctor.
            </p>
            <p>The next day, by peep of dawn, the quartette set
                    forth from St. Nicholas's passage on their expedition, on which no one reckoned more than young
                    Wolsey, who, wearing his college cap and gown, the latter of which was
                    tucked up round his waist, lest its long
                    full skirts should
                    impede his horsemanship, was
                    mounted on his father's easy-pacing grey
                    mare.
                For the convenience of riding he was
                    accommodated with a pair of the old man's
                    boots, which drew up far above his knees,
                    and were wide enough to admit three pair of legs like the stripling's slender
                    limbs.
                He rode
                    cautiously at the head of the cavalcade,
                        taking care to keep close to Humphrey, who
                        jogged along very comfortably on the black nag, whose mettle, if ever it
                        had
                    possessed any, was
                    tamed by the wear and tear of fifteen years
                    of service in the butcher's cart.</p>
            <p>Miles and Peter
                    trudged
                    steadily along with their quarter staffs
                    in their hands, relying on their own excellent pedestrianism to reach the ultimate place of their
                    destination almost as soon as the horsemen of the party, whose steeds they knew
                    would
                    be
                    sorely
                    jaded before they reached St. Peters, Wangford, where their master had
                    directed them to crave lodging far the night of the monks of Clugni, who
                    there occupied a cell dependent on the
                    monastery Of Thetford, which also was the
                    parent house of the cell at Reydon.</p>
            <p>The two saucy knaves occasionally
                    exchanged sly glances, and cracked dry jokes on the unsuitable array and cautious
                        riding of the young Oxford student, their master's son, and the
                    steady jog-trot of Humphrey, who rode quite at his ease on a soft sheepskin which supplied the place of a saddle, by being
                    tightly
                    buckled with a broad leathern strap under
                    the belly of the black nag, whose quiet temper allowed her to be
                    ridden
                    safely without the aid of
                stirrups.</p>
            <p>The sun rose
                    brightly in a soft April sky by the time
                    they reached Woodbridge.
                Young
                    Wolsey
                    had now become familiar with the paces of the grey mare, and the excitement of
                    the exercise, the beauty of the morning, the invigorating freshness of the air,
                    and lovely succession of new and agreeable objects, contributing to raise
                    his spirits, he soon began to assume a little more of the cavalier, and occasionally
                    used the whip and the spurs, in defiance of all Humphrey's prudential cautions.
                Nature had well qualified the youthful
                    student, both in form and agility, to play
                    the graceful horseman, and before
                    they arrived at Wickham Market, the skill
                    and boldness with which he managed his steed
                        was a matter of surprise to the whole
                    party. At this little town they stopped, and
                        refreshed both men and beasts with a
                    substantial breakfast, and then set forward
                    on their journey with renewed spirits.
                Young
                    Wolsey, who had a
                    purpose of his own to answer, put his father's mare to her speed, and soon left the pedestrian
                    Peter, and the hapless nag with its double burden, of
                        Humphrey and Miles, far
                    in the rear, regardless of their shouts of Fair play, master
                            Thomas! fair play! and Alack, alack, Sir, have a care of master's mare!
            </p>
            <p>But the stripling, who liked not the repeated
                    hints which Humphrey
                    had
                    given him of the propriety and expediency,
                    to say nothing of the kindness of giving
                    poor
                    Peter a lift behind him, now they were clear of the houses, was
                    determined to ride forward, not wishing the bachelor's cap and gown to appear in such close fellowship with the butcher's blue and greasy buff of his father's men.
                Besides, he greatly
                    desired, instead of keeping the jog-trot pace that suited their
                    convenience, to gain an hour or two to spend with the monks of the Holyrood at
                    Blitheborough, and to examine the
                    antiquities, architecture, and localities of that ancient and interesting place,
                    through which the route chalked out for him by
                    his father lay; but the elder
                    Wolsey
                    had
                    strictly
                    charged
                    Humphrey in his hearing, not
                        to permit his young master to delay their journey, by wasting
                        his time and theirs in prating Latin
                        gibberish with the black locusts of Blitheborough (as he irreverently
                    styled those worthy anchorites), especially
                        as he did not want to deal with them for sheep, the last he had
                        bought off their walks having
                        proved a very poor bargain."</p>
            <p>Now young
                    Wolsey, when he heard this caution, secretly
                    resolved to arrange matters so as to enjoy the
                    conference with the monks without either infringing his father's directions, or being
                    pestered with the company of his blue-frocked retainers.
                So, without allowing himself time to observe the pastoral Benhall, Kensale, or
                    the picturesque village of Yoxford, which was then, as now, one of the prettiest in Suffolk, or even pausing to bestow more than the tribute of a passing glance of interest on
                    Cockfield's Gothic Hall, at that period newly built, and rising
                    proudly from its embowering woods, he prest his mare on, and though, as well as
                    her, sorely
                    wearied with the unwonted number of
                    miles he had
                    traversed, his youthful spirits carried him forward with unabated energy, till, on descending the last hill after crossing the extensive track of purple heath, known by
                    the name of Blitheborough Sheep-walks, that most stately structure, the church
                    of the Holy Trinity, rose before him, not in the dilapidated grandeur which even
                    now strikes the eye of the eastward traveller with astonishment and delight, as,
                    grey with the mantling lichens, and crumbling with the neglect and injuries of
                    revolving centuries, it bursts upon his view, amidst surrounding desolation, but
                    in all the magnificence of the monastic ages, untouched by time and unimpaired
                    by accident, with the bright sunbeams playing and flashing on the many-coloured
                    stains of its wide and lofty windows.</p>
            <p>Young
                    Wolsey
                    checked his horse, and gazed upon this noble edifice with the enthusiasm natural
                    to the future founder of colleges and gothic buildings; then slowly, and looking
                    often backwards, he proceeded to the cell
                    and chapel of the Holy Rood, which indeed was so contiguous to the spot that he
                        was able still to enjoy a close view of the new church, as it was then called, while he partook of the good cheer which the hospitable fraternity produced for his refreshment, and to which the hungry stripling did ample justice.
                As the bells were chiming for vespers, monastic etiquette compelled him to accompany the monks to their pretty chapel, for which building the
                    traveller would now look in vain, as its only relics are the crumbling
                    group of broken gray arches, so thickly mantled with ivy and crowned with wild
                    flowers, that form such an interesting feature in the landscape of the desolated
                    village of Blitheburgh.</p>
            <p>When the evening service was concluded, the friendly monks gratified their visitor with an interior view of the
                    church of the Holy Trinity, and pointed out
                    to him its rich carvings, screens, trellises, and magnificently sculptured and
                    emblazoned roof, not forgetting to call his attention to the antique tombs
                    which, as tradition reports, once covered the mortal remains of Annas, king of the East Angles, and Ferminius, his son, who were slain in a bloody battle with Penda, the pagan king of Mercia, which was
                    fought in the adjacent marshes of Bulcamp, or
                    Baldkemp.
                From the leads over the south aisle, they made him observe the fine sea view
                    of Southwold, Walberswick, and the city of Dunwich, well known to him in
                    ecclesiastic history as the ancient metropolitan city of the kingdom of the East
                    Angles, where Saxon monarchs kept court in
                    the olden time, and the bishop of the two counties held his see, till the resistless waves of the German
                    Ocean committed such ravages as compelled the diocesan to remove his episcopal see to Thetford, and afterwards
                    buried that time-honoured seat of learning and royalty (Dunwich), with its walls
                    and brazen gates, its fifty-two churches and religious houses, together with its
                    numerous streets and public buildings, beneath its raging waters.</p>
            <p>With a sigh the young student turned from the contemplation of the
                    melancholy wreck of ancient splendour, which the fallen city of the East
                    Anglians presented even in the sixteenth century, when several churches and
                    numerous vestiges of its former greatness still survived the storms of ages and
                    the assaults of the hungry waves; but what would he have thought had he
                    seen it as it now is, reduced to a few ruinous fishermen's huts, and of all its
                    churches and religious houses, retaining only the roofless shell of one, in
                    which divine service is no longer
                    performed!
                Doubtless he would
                    have
                    applied the words of the lamentation pronounced by the prophet over the
                    desolation of Tyre: Is this your joyous city, whose antiquity
                            is of ancient date? Who hath
                        taken this counsel against Tyre, the
                        crowning city, whose merchants are
                        princes, whose traffickers are the
                        honourable of the earth?
            </p>
            <p>Young
                    Wolsey
                    had
                    been too deeply
                    engaged in the contemplation of these
                    interesting localities to embrace the
                    opportunity of displaying his own learning to the friendly monks, who had
                    treated him with the respect which his
                    natural talents and early acquirements were
                    well calculated to inspire, and pressingly
                    invited him to sojourn with them during the rest of the evening, and pass the night in their dormitory; but the
                    importunities of Humphrey (who, with Peter and Miles, had
                    arrived while he was at vespers, and having
                    refreshed themselves and the black nag, were now clamorous to proceed) prevailing
                    over his desire of accepting an invitation
                    so agreeable to his own inclinations, he took a loving farewell of the hospitable fraternity, promising to
                        find some way of gratifying his wish of passing a few hours with them on his return.
                Then mounting the gray mare, he rode forward at a gentle pace with his weary and somewhat malcontent companions, who scrupled not to reproach him for the want of good fellowship he had
                    displayed in deserting their company.
                Nor did Humphrey
                    fail to exert the privilege of an old and trusted servant, by
                        rating his young master soundly for having
                    over heated the gray mare on a long journey,
                    besides incurring much peril of accidents
                    both to himself and that valuable animal, on account of his being an inexperienced rider, and quite unacquainted with the road.
                The young student, who was of course rather impatient of these rebukes, which he considered very derogatory to the dignity of a bachelor
                    of Oxford to receive from butchers and
                    cattle drovers, endeavoured to escape from them by a repetition of his offence,
                    namely, outriding the party; but that was no longer in his power, for he had
                    fairly
                    knocked up the gray mare, so that she was unable to compete with the shabby nag on which Humphrey
                    rode, and the only alternative left him, was to listen
                    meekly, or to turn a deaf ear, to the reproaches that assailed him right and left, and amuse himself with his own reflections, or in contemplating the charms of the varied
                    landscape before him, when, on ascending the
                    gentle hill leading from Blitheburgh, he found himself among the rich woods and cowslipped meads of Henham,
                    whose castellated hall, then the residence of the Brandons, rose in all its
                    gothic grandeur over grove and vale, as the crowning object of the prospect, but
                        was soon after hidden behind the
                    intervening screen of deep embowering shades, which were then almost impervious to the light of day, and
                    converted the advancing gloom of evening into early night.
                No sooner was the party involved in this security, than the offended trio, Humphrey,
                        Miles, and Peter, united their chorus of grumbling at their
                    detention at Blitheburgh, declaring that
                    they were
                    benighted, and should in all probability be
                    robbed of the sum entrusted to them for the purchase of the cattle.</p>
            <p>The welcome sound of the curfew bell of St. Peter's, Wangford, however, soon
                    informed them that their apprehensions were
                    groundless, and put them into better humour, by advertising them that they were not more than a mile distant from the
                    place of their destination, and presently, after emerging from
                    beneath the sombre shadows of Henham's oaken glades, they found themselves once more in day light, and in the
                    immediate vicinity of the pretty village of Wangford, which, with its
                    picturesque monastery and chapel of St. Peter's, crowning a gentle eminence, lay
                    full before them.</p>
            <p>The pastoral rivulet of the Wang, from which the name of this hamlet was derived, was soon forded by the weary travellers, who, proceeding to the little convent, obtained without difficulty food and
                    shelter for the night. The next morning, as soon as matins were over, which service they of course considered themselves bound to attend, they set
                    forward on their short journey to the neighbouring monastery of Reydon, which,
                    as I said before, was a detached branch of the cell of St. Peter's, both
                    dependencies on the monastery of Thetford.</p>
            <p>Leaving its green bowery labyrinth of sylvan lanes, its antique hall and park, its
                    aboriginal fores, and the gray spire of its venerable church, and all that was pleasing and attractive in the
                    landscape of the Reydun, or the red hill (which its Saxon name signifies), to
                    the left, Humphrey
                    guided the party through a narrow, wet, and
                    incommodious road, to a mean conventual building, situated at the most desolate
                    extremity of the parish, among the salt marshes.</p>
            <p>If Wolsey
                    had
                    expected to find learning, piety, or hospitality among this fraternity, he was
                    certainly much disappointed; for a set of more illiterate and narrow-minded men than these Reydon monks were never congregated together.
                Far from expressing the least interest in the
                    acquirements of their young guest,
                    they received the intelligence of his
                    proficiency in the learned languages with dismay, and appeared far better pleased with the conversation of
                        Humphrey, Peter, and
                        Miles, which indeed was more in unison with their tastes than that of the scholastic
                    Wolsey, whom they entertained with long dissertations, not on the fathers or the
                    classics, but on the most profitable breeds of cattle, and the most approved
                    methods of fatting swine, in all which matters they were very fluent, and appeared to consider it passing strange that a butcher's son possessed so little knowledge on such
                    interesting topics.
                They also discussed the best method of curing white bacon, as the fat of pickled
                    pork is
                    called in that part of Suffolk.
                On this delectable article Wolsey and his party had the felicity of supping that evening, which he afterwards declared
                    was the dullest he ever spent in the whole course of his life.</p>
            <p>The next morning, though the bells chimed for matins, the monks made no movement to enter the chapel, as THEIR matin service was
                    confined to that ceremony; and when Wolsey
                    expressed his surprise at such unorthodox neglect of the prescribed offices of holy
                    church, they replied
                    that it was neither a sabbath
                        nor a festival, and their swine must be
                        attended to.</p>
            <p>When this interesting duty had
                    been
                    zealously
                    performed by the fraternity, they proceded with their guests to the marshes
                    where their cattle fed, where a long and animated discussion took place between
                        Humphrey and the superior of the convent
                    respecting the price, the merits, and defects of the beasts which Humphrey
                    deemed most worthy of his attention, in
                    which so much time was
                    wasted that the dinner bell rung before they
                        had
                    settled the price of so much as one
                    bullock.</p>
            <p>At this meal they were again regaled with white bacon, which appeared a standing dish in this convent, for it was
                    produced at supper, breakfast, and dinner;
                    at the latter, indeed, there was the
                    addition of a huge dish of hard dumplings, with which they devoured a quantity of pork dripping by way of
                    sauce.</p>
            <p>The morning had
                    been fine but showery, in the afternoon a
                    heavy rain set in, which rendered it impossible either to visit the
                    cattle-marshes again, or to proceed homewards, which young
                    Wolsey
                    recommended his father's men to do, on the conviction of the impossibility of ever concluding a bargain with these frocked and cowled dealers in cattle and feeders of
                swine.</p>
            <p>The rain, however, continued without intermission, and the malcontent student was
                    compelled to remain where he was till the
                        plague of water, as he called
                    this unwelcome downpouring, should
                abate.</p>
            <p>How to pass the weary interval with men whose
                    minds and manners were so dissimilar to his
                    own, he knew not.
                Books they had never a one except their
                    breviaries, and their acquaintance with these was a doubtful matter to the young student, since no persuasions of his could
                    induce them to perform vespers when the bells chimed for that service,
                    although it was a wet afternoon on which
                    nothing else could
                    be done.</p>
            <p>Whether to attribute this to their utter
                    disrelish to any thing of a spiritual nature, or to their fear of betraying their ignorance in latin and other
                    deficiencies to one whom they feared would
                    detect their blunders, and perhaps report them to their superior at Thetford,
                        Wolsey
                    knew not, but he was so heartily
                    weary of his sojourn among them, that
                    nothing but the most pathetic remonstrances and earnest protestations on the
                    part of Humphrey against such a measure, prevented him from retracing his steps to Blitheburgh, in spite of the
                    rain, and remaining with the monks of
                    Holy-Rood Chapel till his father's people had
                    transacted their business with the
                    conventual graziers of Reydon.</p>
            <p>The following morning proving fine, they again proceeded to the marshes in the hope of striking a bargain which was at
                    length concluded; but not till after a delay that appeared to the impatient
                    Wolsey almost interminable, which time he employed, not in listening to the altercations of the buyer and sellers
                    of the bullocks, but in strolling through
                    the marshes, and making observations, till
                    he obtained a view of Blitheburgh on the
                    line of country that intervened, across which he persuaded himself a much shorter cut to that village might be
                    made than by following the usual road through Wangford.
                Just as he had
                    come to the resolution of attempting that route, the convent bell rang for
                    dinner, and summoned him to a sixth meal of white bacon, of which the monks ate with as keen an appetite as if it had
                    been the first time they ever partook of that savoury fare, of which Wolsey
                    was by this time almost as weary as of the
                    company of the founders of the entertainment.</p>
            <p>The bullocks, twelve in number, were now driven
                    into the convent yard, and Humphrey
                    called upon his young master to pay down the price for which he and the monks had
                    agreed, at the average sum of one pound ten
                    shillings a head, which he pronounced an
                    unconscionable sum with a sly wink of intelligence at the Oxford student, by
                    which he gave the youth, who was about to take
                    his words literally, to understand that he
                        was well satisfied with the bargain.
                In fact, the Reydon monks, shrewed and
                        exacting as they were, had
                    met with more than their match in the calculating, experienced
                    Humphrey, who, without making a boast of his wisdom in this way, knew how to judge of the weight of a living ox almost to an odd pound.
                Till the business was concluded, the money
                    paid, and the receipt given, he had
                    forborne to taste of the convent meed or ale, though both had
                    been pressed upon him with an earnestness
                    passing the bounds either of politeness or hospitality by the cunning monks, who hoped to overcome
                    Humprey's cool clear judgment and caution, by means
                    of the merry brown bowl; but now all fear of being overreached in his bargain in consequence of such an indulgence
                        was at an end, Humphrey, malgre all his young master's expostulations, demanded the lately rejected beverage, of which he, with Miles and Peter
                    drank pretty freely, though not so much as they would
                    have
                    done
                    had the cloistered cattle-dealers been
                    willing to produce more, which they were
                    always
                    sparing in doing after a bargain had
                    been definitely struck.</p>
            <p>The draughts which the trio had
                    swallowed
                    had
                    had, however, the effect of putting them all into such good humour, that when Wolsey on mounting
                    proposed to them his plan of changing the roundabout route though Wrangford, for a
                    straight cut acroos the marshes to Blitheburgh, they offered no objection, for even the prudent
                    Humphrey
                    was desirous of adopting any expedient by which they might make up for the time they had lost in drinking
                    the convent ale after the business was
                    transacted.</p>
            <p>The monks assured them the project was feasible, since the branch of the
                    Blithe which separated Hentham and Reydon was fordable, and they would
                    save a considerable distance by crossing the river, but their hospitality
                    did not extend to the civility of sending one of their swineherds or goose-boys
                    to point out the precise spot at which the
                    attempt might be
                    made without danger to passengers.
                The stream was much swollen in consequence of
                    the late heavy rains; Humphrey and the drovers paused on the rushy bank, each prudently
                    declining to be the first to try the ford. Wolsey, who was
                    piqued at their doubts of his assurance that it was safe! perfectly safe! though he would rather have had one of the others show a demonstrable proof that there was no danger, urged his reluctant
                    mare forward.</p>
            <p>Hold, master Thomas, hold! for the love
                        of St. Margaret of Rissmere,
                    cried
                    Humphrey, who was
                    suddenly
                    sobered by the sight of his young master's peril, and the
                    recollection that the stream was deep and
                    muddy.</p>
            <p>Now this St. Margaret of Rissmere was a saint
                    for whom Wolsey
                    had neither love nor reverence, for she was the patroness of the unlearned monks of Reydon; so, without heeding the adjuration so pathetically
                    addressed to him in her name, he boldly
                    plunged into the dark and swollen waters of
                    the dangerous ford.
                He was, as we have seen, an inexperienced
                    rider on dry land, but a more skillful horseman than the stripling student would
                    have
                    found it a difficult matter to retain his seat and guide the terrified animal, who presently
                    lost her footing, and began to kick in the
                    muddy slippery ooze of which the bed of the Blithe and its dependent streams are
                    composed, and which, having recently been
                    violently disturbed by the heavy rains, was
                    in a state of complete ferment and liquefaction.</p>
            <p>Wolsey, though encumbered with his bachelors gown, which he had not this time taken
                    the precautionary measure of tucking up and
                        fastening to his girdle, courageously
                    maintained his seat till the mare, exhausted
                    with her violent efforts, sunk, and left him floating on the stream.
                He was an expert swimmer in the clear calm Orwell, or the pastoral Gipping, his
                    native streams, but scarcely a fish that had been used to the fresh sparkling element of such rivers as these, could have steered its course in the dank
                    vortex of brackish mud in which poor Wolsey
                    was
                    immersed.</p>
            <p>Peter and Miles
                    stood
                    aghast at the accident, uttering
                    doleful cries for help, without venturing to make a single effort to save the almost
                    exhausted youth.
                Humphrey, the faithful
                    Humphrey, at the first alarm had
                    dismounted from the nag, and was
                    preparing to plunge into the stream to save his
                    master's son, or perish in the attempt, when
                    one of Sir Richard Brandon's wood-rangers,
                    who had
                    seen the accident and hastened to the spot, reached the end of the long pole he had
                    been
                    using in leaping the marsh ditches to the youth, by which assistance, the stream
                    being narrow at that place, he was
                    enabled, though not without some difficulty,
                    to gain the opposite bank, from which, as
                    soon as he had cleared his eyes and mouth of
                    the salt, bitter, and unsavoury ooze he had
                    been
                    compelled to swallow, he called out in an accent
                    of distress to Humphrey, Oh! Humphrey, Humphrey!
                        what shall we say to my father about the gray mare?</p>
            <p>
                St. Margaret of Rissmere take the mare! sobbed
                        Humphrey, who appeared to consider the
                        patroness of Reydon as somehow chargeable with their mishap; don't talk of her, my dear boy, when she had nearly been the death of you. Howsoever, master Thomas, you must
                        never undertake to lead those who are wiser than yourself short cuts any more. I hope you have
                        had enough of this precious ford, that was to take you such a near way to Blitheburgh."
            </p>
            <p>
                Why so it will, you simple fellow, said
                        Wolsey, laughing, and wiping the mud
                        from his face, do not you see the beautiful church over those marshes almost
                        at my elbow? I shall
                        bestir myself to get there as fast as I can now I am over the water, that I may get dry clothes, a good supper, and some pleasant
                        chat with the worthy monks of the
                        Holy Rood, which will
                        console me for the drenching I have got.
            </p>
            <p>Alack, alack! master Thomas! what is to become of us and the bullocks?
                    howled
                    Miles and Peter from the
                    opposite bank.</p>
            <p>You may come over the river to
                        me, an you like,
                    responded
                    Wolsey, from the other side.</p>
            <p>We durst not do that for our lives,
                    cried the trembling drovers.</p>
            <p>
                Then turn yourselves and the
                        bullocks about, and find the road to
                        Wangford as well as ye can: Humphrey
                        knows the country, and he will
                        guide ye to Blitheburgh by that
                        roundabout way, ye poltroons, unless ye choose to stay where ye are
                        till I am a Cardinal, when it is my intention to build a bridge over this sweet stream, to prevent other travellers from incurring the peril which I have
                        done, in endeavouring to ford such a
                        bottomless abyss of mud.
            </p>
            <p>We will not follow the young bachelor to
                    Blitheburgh, where doubtless he met with
                    agreeable entertainment, nor will the limits
                    of our tale admit of our tracing the
                    progressive steps by which he in the sequel attained to the eminence to which his ambition, even in childhood, prompted him to aspire.
                By keeping his attention constantly
                    fixed on this object, he found it at last within his reach; but was he then contented?
                Let me answer this query with another:&#x97;When was the desire of human greatness ever satisfied?
                I refer the juvenile reader to the historical
                    summary for further particulars of the career of this extraordinary man, who,
                    when he had
                    attained to the coveted rank of Cardinal,
                    though he was burdened with the cares of the
                    prime minister of England, which office he held during twenty years of Henry the
                        Eighth's reign, was not forgetful
                    of his promise of building a bridge over the
                    stream which had so nearly proved fatal to
                    himself.
                The name of the bridge, and the local tradition thereunto belonging, will long, I trust, exist to preserve the
                    memory of an action of pure benevolence to future ages.</p>
        
            <h1>Historical Summary</h1>
            <p>Thomas Wolsey was the only son of Thomas and
                    Joan Wolsey, and was born at Ipswich, in
                    August, 1471. His father was a butcher
                and grazier. The house in which Wolsey was born
                    is still shown, and is situated in the south
                side of the passage leading to St. Nicholas' churchyard; and in the ancient
                shambles, or butchery, which lately stood upon the Cornhill, at Ipswich, was a stall, or stand, with the initials of
                Wolsey's father carved thereon, and some other insignia which tradition points out
                as belonging to him. Wolsey's father, though a man of low trade, was in opulent circumstances, and connected with some of
                the most respectable families at Ipswich, either by descent or marriage. His will is preserved, wherein it appears that he
                left his lands to his wife Joan, and the rest of his wealth divided between his wife
                and son, reserving however a handsome bequest to the church of St. Nicholas and the
                poor of the parish.</p>
            <p>There are floating traditions in Suffolk, which intimate that the butcher Wolsey was desirous that his son should follow his own trade, and in pursuance of this plan,
                he made him assist is driving the beasts he bought at various markets for sale and slaughter
                at Ipswich. In one of these expeditions he nearly lost his life, at a dangerous ford
                at Reydon. Over a branch of the river Blythe, when driving a number of bullocks
                which had
                been purchased from Reydon salt marshes and
                South wold common. It is further said, that he
                promised on the spot, "that if ever he became cardinal, he would build a bridge at that dangerous spot." Wolsey
                kept his word, and when he arrived at the high dignity his youthful ambition even
                then aimed at, he built a bridge at Reydon, which is to this day called Wolsey Bridge.</p>
            <p>It is a singular thing, that although forced to
                join at times the inconsistent occupations of a drover and student, that Wolsey was admitted as a bachelor of arts at Magdalen
                College at the age of fourteen, from which extraordinary circumstance he was called
                the Boy Bachelor. It must be observed, that
                students were entered at the universities much
                earlier in former times than is usual at this
                era; but to take a degree at the age of fourteen, justly excited universal
                astonishment throughout the kingdom, in all men who were devoted to, or interested in, learning; and Wolsey was marked as a
                character likely to rise in the church, which was then the only path to high distinction. We must not forget to note
                here, that young Wolsey had been as promising at Ipswich school as he was as a student at Magdalen College; so says
                Lloyd, one of his biographers. The first step to his subsequent greatness in the
                state was his appointment to the situation of
                domestic chaplain to Henry the Seventh, a monarch who himself had received a conventual education, and was a discerning patron of learned men, knowing well how to
                appreciate them. There were, as matters stood in the middle ages, two roads in the
                church to great distinction: one was, for a leraned priest to practise great
                austerity and sanctity, so that he was
                considered a saint and revered by all men; and the other, to devote himself
                regularly to business as a statesman, and govern church and state as prime minister,
                which was done in England by whoever held the
                office of lord chancellor. The latter path was
                chosen by Wolsey, who had a particular inclination
                to a court life, and declared, that "if he could set one foot in the court, he would soon introduce his whole body."</p>
            <p>The first affair of state in which he was
                concerned, was a mission from Henry the Seventh
                to Maximilian, Emperor of Germany, who was then
                at Bruges. After receiving his instructions at the royal palace of Shene (now called
                Richmond), where the king then kept court, he set out on his errand. We must
                consider the state of the roads, and the delays of travelling at that time, which were so great that a journey from Ipswich to
                London took at least a week, and even in the memory of man, a day and night was spent on the road when travelling by a
                stage coach. Therefore, when Wolsey presented himself before Henry the Seventh at
                the end of three days, that monarch naturally supposed that his envoy had not yet set out, but had returned for fresh instructions, and he began to reproach him for his
                dilatoriness, when, to his astonishment, Wolsey declared that he had actually been at
                Bruges, and performed his mission successfully. Ay, answered the king, but
                    upon farther deliberation, finding that something had
                    been omitted in your instructions, I
                    despatched a messenger after you with fuller powers. To which Wolsey replied,
                    that he had indeed met the messenger on his
                    return, and on communicating with him, found that he had anticipated the view that Henry had taken of the business, and performed his negociation
                    with the emperor precisely according to Henry's second thoughts of the affair,
                    so that there was no need of a second
                    journey. Henry was highly pleased with
                his envoy's sagacity and promptitude, and with its favourable issue; he gave him
                public thanks, and declared him in council fit to be entrusted with the management of affairs of the utmost importance. He
                rewarded him with the deanery of Lincoln, and the prebends of Walton, Brindhold, and
                Stow; and to complete his good fortune, his graceful and eloquent relation of the
                particulars of his embassy before the council, attracted the notice of the Prince of
                Wales, afterwards Henry the Eighth, who grew from that time extremely fond of his
                company.</p>
            <p>Such was his introduction as a statesman. From
                the first year of the reign of Henry the Eighth, 1509, till 1529, the butcher's son
                ruled England with absolute power, and at the same time with great ability. These
                twenty years was the happiest epoch of Henry's
                reign; for, after Wolsey's fall, the sovereign commenced a career of crime, and his
                people of misery. Wolsey filled the high offices of Grand Almoner, Archbishop of
                York, Lord Chancellor, Pope's Legate, and Cardinal. He carried personal splendour
                and state higher than any subject ever did before or since, and would most likely have died in possession of all these
                honours, had he not aimed at the highest then in
                the world, even at the Popedom; but his intrigues to reach this pinnacle of a
                churchman's ambition, lured him to such imprudent steps as caused the downfall of
                his mighty power, and a few weeks after he died of grief at Leicester Abbey.</p>
            <p>The munificent public works executed by Wolsey, both as prime minister and from his
                own private revenue, are greater perhaps than any subject ever performed. He
                reendowed and reformed his own university of Oxford, with such magnificence, that he
                    is almost considered as its founder,
                according to its present state. His love for his native county of Suffolk was great, and the college he built and endowed
                in his mother town of Ipswich, is a proof that
                he had the magnanimity not to be ashamed of his origin; but the rapacious tyrant, whose
                caprice caused his downfall, seized upon the revenues and destroyed the infant
                college, of which only one of the gateways remain. But perhaps the most
                extraordinary work in which this great man engaged, was, that he partly wrote and
                wholly revised, Lillye's grammar, a work of such use that it was in general use within the last century. Such was the love of this mighty statesman for
                learning, that he paused in his career of unbounded power and pomp to smooth the way
                to children for the attainment of knowledge: who, after such an example, need be ashamed of devoting their talents to writing
                children's books!</p>
            <p>This sketch of Wolsey has not shown the dark side of his character, which was deformed with many faults, and some crimes.
                Shakspeare has summed up the account of both good and ill, with such skill that
                volumes cannot impress upon the youthful mind a more accurate comprehension of
                Wolsey's character, than that given in the dialogue between Catherine of Arragon,
                Henry the Eighth's divorced queen, and Griffith, her chamberlain.</p>
            <p>CATHERINE.</p>
            <p>Didst thou not tell me, Griffith, as thou led'st me, That the great child of honour,
                Cardinal Wolsey, Was dead? Prithee, good Griffith, tell me how he died.</p>
            <p>GRIFFITH.</p>
            <p>Well, the voice goes, madam; For after the stout Earl Northumberland Arrested him at
                York, and brought him forward (As a man sore tainted), to his answer, He fell sick
                suddenly, and grew so ill, He could not sit his
                mule. At last, with easy roads, he came to Leicester, Lodg'd in the abbey; where the
                reverend abbot, With all his convent, honourably received him; To whom he gave these
                words,&#x97;" O, father abbot, An old man, broken with the storms of state, Is come to
                lay his weary hones among ye; Give him a little earth for charity!" So went to bed;
                where eagerly his sickness Pursu'd him still; and, three nights after this, About
                the hour of eight (which he himself Foretold should be his last), full of repentance, Continual meditations, tears, and
                sorrows, He gave his honours to the world again, His blessed part to heaven, and
                slept in peace.</p>
            <p>CATHERINE.</p>
            <p>So may he rest; his faults lie gently on him! Yet, thus far, Griffith, give me leave
                to speak him And yet with charity ;&#x97;He was a man
                Of an unbounded stomach, ever ranking Himself with princes; one, that by suggestion
                Tithed all the kingdom; simony was fair play;
                His own opinions were his law: I'the presence He
                    would stay untruths; and be ever double, Both in his words and meaning: He was never, But where he meant to ruin, pitiful:
                His promises were then as be was, mighty; But his performance as he now is, nothing.
                Of his own body he was ill, and gave The clergy
                ill example.</p>
            <p>GRIFFITH.</p>
            <p>Noble madam, Men's evil manners live in brass; their virtues We write in water. May
                it please your highness To hear me speak his good now?</p>
            <p>CATHERINE.</p>
            <p>Yes. good Griffith I were malicious else.</p>
            <p>GRIFFITH.</p>
            <p>This cardinal, Though from an humble stock, undoubtedly Was fashioned to much honour.
                Fom his cradle He was a scholar, and a ripe and
                good one; Exceeding wise, fair spoken, and persuading: Lofty, and sour, to them who
                lov'd him not; But, to those men that sought him, sweet as summer. And though he were unsatisfied in getting (Which were a sin), yet in bestowing, madam, He was most princely: Ever witness for him Those twins of
                learning, which he raised in you, Ipswich and Oxford! one of which fell with him,
                Unwilling to outlive the good he did it; The other, though unfinished, yet so
                famous, So excellent in art, and still so rising, That Christendom shall ever speak his virtue. His overthrow heap'd happiness
                upon him; For then, and not till then, he felt himself, And found the blessedness of
                being little: And, to add greater honours to his age Than man could give him, he died, fearing God.</p>
            <p>CATHERINE.</p>
            <p>After my death I wish no other herald, No other speaker of my living actions, To keep
                my honour from corruption, But such an honest chronicler as Griffith. Whom I most
                hated living, thou hast made me, With thy
                religious truth and modesty, Now in his ashes honour. Peace be with him.</p>
        </body>
</html>
